[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast
with rachel burden and charlie state
here are our headlines today a warning
that the new uk variant of coronavirus
may be more deadly than first thought
as the prime minister says infection
rates are still worryingly high
doctors leaders call for changes in the
vaccine rollout they want the 12-week
gap between the first and second fires
at doses
to be halved tighter border restrictions
could be on the way including hotel
quarantines for those entering the uk
good morning the fa cup fairy tale
journey is over for chorley but it took
a wolves
wonder girl to beat them and the
part-timers were left thinking what
might have been
as they came so close
what will we do with the drunken sailor
what will we
we meet the sea shanty star
who's just handed a record deal given up
his job as a postman
well we've had snow showers here and
there across the country over the last
couple of days
there's an increasing chance of heavier
snow
across the southern half of the uk over
the weekend
find out in the forecast
[Music]
good morning it's saturday the 23rd of
january our top story today the prime
minister has warned
that a new uk variant of coronavirus the
one we have been talking about recently
may be more deadly than first thought
he stressed that more research needed to
be done and it's thought
the vaccines will still work it comes
after a record number of vaccines were
given in the latest 24-hour period
more than 400 000 people got their first
dose
but senior doctors have called for a
shorter gap between the first and second
doses
of the pfizer biontech vaccine the
british medical association wants that
after six
weeks saying the policy was difficult to
justify
dan johnson has this report
there's a new tone to the government's
message not just follow the
rules but asking us all to acknowledge
the pressure on hospitals
and question our movements our level of
interaction
look them in the eyes and tell them
you're doing all you can to stop the
spread of
covet 19. transmission rates have been
fueled by the new variant of coronavirus
and now there are early signs it could
also be more deadly
it's early days it's limited research
more analysis is needed to be certain
but that hasn't stopped scientists
getting concerned
i think the evidence is now reasonably
strong
but only based on this one data set but
we are definitely struggling with this
uh news with with this new variant um
do you know whether it's more more
lethal or not
that struggle is underlined by the
latest government figures
showing there were 40 261
new infections recorded in the last
24-hour period
there were more than 38 and a half
thousand people in hospital with
coronavirus
in the seven days to this wednesday and
another 1401 people have died
within 28 days of a positive covid19
test vaccines are still expected to be
effective
more than 5.3 million first doses have
been given now
but there are calls to speed that up
doctors are questioning the decision to
spread vaccine doses 12 weeks apart
the british medical associations called
for that to be cut to six weeks
saying the uk is alone in allowing that
much of a delay
it's also concerned about unpredictable
vaccine supplies
most nations in the world are facing
similar challenges
to the uk in having limited vaccine
supplies and also wanting to protect
their population maximally
no other nation has adopted the uk's
approach
we think that the flexibility that the
world health organization
offers to 42 days
is being stretched far too much to go
from six weeks
right through to 12 weeks and pictures
like this from heathrow airport
have added pressure for firmer measures
at our borders especially with other
variants emerging
around the world on monday ministers
will discuss the possibility
of enforced quarantine on arrival in
designated hotels
but the key message to most of us
remains the same
stay home protect the nhs save lives
dan johnson bbc news
let's speak to our political
correspondent helen capp then helen
it does seem this issue about potential
new travel restrictions is the next big
political decision that they'll have to
take there in westminster
yes it is i mean you heard there some of
the concerns about the variant of the
virus that developed here in the uk
in kent but of course it isn't the only
place where there have been
variants who which have popped up
they've also uh developed in in south
africa and brazil for example so there
is a focus on
how do you make sure that you don't
import those new strains
into the uk and also that photograph
that we saw there of those queues at
heathrow that has also put the focus on
what's happening at the borders too
labour's saying that
ministers need to ensure better control
now as it stands the anybody arriving
into the uk from anywhere except ireland
the isle of man or the channel islands
already has to quarantine for 10 days
and they have to prove they've had a
negative covid test but on monday
ministers are going to meet
to look at going further potentially
that idea of
making people quarantine in designated
hotels now one government source says
that that is likely to be adopted
although no final decision has been made
and if such policy was to be introduced
well then there would be some exemptions
to it for example for lorry drivers who
are driving freight
across the channel but it is likely that
that is likely to be adopted and of
course
worth remembering that the current
situation is under the current guidance
that travel should only be happening if
it is absolutely necessary
thank you very much helen the royal
college of nursing is calling for all
staff in the uk to be given a higher
grade face mask to protect them against
new
variants of coronavirus college has
written to the government and the health
and safety executive warning that the
lives of nurses could be at risk if
they're given inadequate
personal protective equipment the
department of health says
it's looked at the evidence and found no
reason to change existing
recommendation today marks exactly one
year since the chinese city of wuhan
became the first place to go into
lockdown the first cases of the virus
were detected at a local food market
transport links with the outside world
were cut and the population of 11
million were confined to their homes for
76 days
life in wuhan is now largely back to
normal
a nighttime curfew will come into force
in the netherlands in a bid to
curb coronavirus infection rates in the
country people will be asked to stay at
home from 9 p.m
to 4 30 a.m with fines for anyone found
outdoors without a valid reason flights
have also been banned from high-risk
areas to limit the spread
of new coronavirus variants
democratic leaders in the u.s congress
have said the articles of impeachment
against
former president donald trump will be
delivered to the senate
on monday the full trial itself though
will not begin until next month
the house of representatives impeached
mr trump for incitement of insurrection
last week after the capitol building was
stormed by his supporters
two rail routes which were closed more
than 50 years ago are to be reopened
with a new investment package
worth almost 600 million pounds
east west rail will eventually connect
oxford
and cambridge and then the
northumberland line
is aiming to reintroduce passenger
services
transport secretary grant shap says the
ambition is to stimulate the economy and
connect
communities and it's
what's the time now coming up to eight
minutes past eight now one group of
people who may have been
feeling particularly concerned during
the pandemic is pregnant women
now the husband of a nurse who died with
coronavirus after her baby was delivered
is calling for better protection for
pregnant workers
mary ajipong died shortly after giving
birth by emergency cesarean last april
john iron monger has been speaking to
her husband
and in ernest morning going to work look
at this one
she had this unique personality that you
would
just fall in love with her i strongly
believe
you know mary shouldn't have died mary
worked late into her pregnancy at luton
and dunstable hospital
in april last year she fell critically
ill with covid19
her baby was delivered just days before
she died
it's been nine months since you lost
mary
and since you've had a new person to
look after
little mary how have you been coping
with that
huge change in your life it's been
really tough
you know and
it's it's not just dealing with the loss
having it just a few days old baby you
know on your own as a parent
having to also deal with a two-year-old
son who keeps asking you where's
where's my mom sometimes even when i
pick him from school he tells me that i
want to go home
and i'll ask him where he's home and
he'll tell you where mommy is
there is mounting clinical evidence that
pregnant women with covid19 may be more
likely to need intensive care
and to have their babies prematurely
she's
a blessing and all smiley
like a mom it's all emotional when
i'm asked to talk about her you know
because mary
was so expecting a daughter she
really really wanted a daughter since
the start of the pandemic the advice for
working pregnant women has been simply
to take
more precautions at 28 weeks and mary's
widowers petitioning the government to
do more
i watch the news and the women in icus
are all pregnant women
and it brings back memory it brings back
pain i don't think any other family has
to go through this
i need to speak up and i need to stand
for them i'm presenting this petition
in memory of mary agupong a stand that
was taken up last week by ernest's local
mp
the petition calls on the government to
protect pregnant women by ensuring that
they can either work from home
or that they must be suspended from work
on full pay
during this pandemic i think the
government have been slow in a number of
areas but particularly in the area of
pregnant women and protecting pregnant
women
of course at the beginning of this we
didn't know the impact on certain groups
but more and more evidence shows that
pregnant women need to be protected
sooner
the health secretary said he will take
clinical advice on changing shielding
guidelines
if nothing else it could reassure
expectant moms
and the families who rely on them john
iron munger
bbc news
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news